---
sidebar: auto
---

# Declaration of Planned Community for Kwiniaska Ridge
This Declaration of Planned Community for Kwiniaska Ridge (the "Declaration") is made by The Snyder Shelburne Properties, LLC, a Vermont limited liability company with a place of business in Shelburne, Vermont ("Declarant").
1. Declarant is the owner in fee simple of a 51.04 acre, more or less, parcel of land in Shelburne, Vermont on the west side of Spear Street (the "Property") as shown on the following plats: "Lands of ABC/MRC, Inc., Spear Street, Shelburne, Vermont, Subdivision (South)," Sheet PL-2, prepared by Lamoureux & Dickinson Consulting Engineers, Inc. dated May 23, 2017, last revised April 12, 2019, and recorded in Map Slide 894B of the Town of Shelburne Land Records; and "Lands of ABC/MRC, Inc., Spear Street, Shelburne, Vermont, Subdivision (North)," Sheet PL-3, prepared by Lamoureux & Dickinson Consulting Engineers, Inc. dated May 23, 2017, last revised April 12, 2019, and recorded in Map Slide 895A of the TOwn of Shelburne Land Records (collectively, the "Plat").
1. The Property has received permits and approvals for the subdivision and development of ninety-one (91) lots designated as Lots S1–S27, 1C–28C and T1–T36 on the Plat and on the Plans (the "Lots"), of which Lots S1–S27 are single-family home lots (the "Single Family Lots"), Lots 1C–28C are each designed for use and occupancy by a carriage home on each building footprint lot (the "Carriage Home Lots"), Lots T1–T36 are each designed for use and occupancy by an attached townhome on each building footprint lot (the "Townhome Lots") and eight (8) open space parcels designated as Open Space Parcels 1–8 on the Plat and Plans.
1. Declarant has established an association known as the Kwiniaska Ridge Homeowners' Association, Inc., a Vermont non-profit corporation (the "Association").  All of the owners of the Lots will be members of the Association.  The Declarant intends to convey the Open Space Parcels (defined below) as shown on the Plat and Plans to the Association, which will be responsible for the maintenance, repair and upkeep of these areas for the benefit of all owners.  The Association will also be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of additional common elements and facilities described in this Declaration, including common portions of the stormwater drainage system for the Planned Community.
Now, therefore,
Declarant hereby makes and executes this Declaration of Planned Community for the purposes stated herein and upon the following terms and conditions.
## Article 1 - Submission; Defined Terms
### Section 1.1 - Submission
Declarant hereby submits the Property to this Declaration and to the provisions of [Title 27A V.S.A. §§ 1-101 et seq., known as the Vermont Common Interest Ownership Act][act], as amended from time to time (the "Act"), and hereby creates with respect to the Property a Planned Community to be known as "Kwiniaska Ridge" (the "Planned Community") which shall be held, sold, transferred, conveyed, used, occupied, mortgaged, or otherwise encumbered subject to the reservations, covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements, assessments, and liens hereinafter set forth which are for the purpose of protecting the value and desirability of the Property, and which shall run with the title to the Property, and which shall be binding on all parties having any right, title, or interest in or to the Property or any part thereof, and their respective heirs, legal representatives, successors, and assigns, and shall inure to the benefit of each and every owner of all or any portion of the Property.
[act]: https://www.hopb.co/vermont-common-interest-ownership-act-title-27a
### Section 1.2 - Definitions
Each capitalized term used herein without definition shall have the meaning specified in this Declaration or the Bylaws of the Kwiniaska Ridge Homeowners' Association, Inc. (the "Bylaws"), or if not otherwise defined in this Declaration or the Bylaws then as defined in the Act:
- "[**Act**][act]" means [the Vermont Common Interest Ownership Act, 27A V.S.A. §§ 1-101][act] et seq., as amended from time to time.
- "**Access Roads**" means:  Caspian Lane, Elmore Street, Willoughby Lane and Carmi Drive until accepted by the Town of Shelburne as public roads.
- "**Allocated Interests**" means the Common Expense Liability and the votes in the Association.
- "**Assessment**" means the amount assessed against the Owners of each Lot from time to time by the Association described below in the manner provided herein.
- "**Association**" means the Kwiniaska Ridge Homeowners' Association, Inc., a Vermont non-profit corporation organized under [§ 3-101 of the Act][act].  The ownership of each Lot shall include one membership in the Association.
- "**Board**" means the board of directors of the Association charged with the management and operation of the Association, being the Executive Board as defined in the Act and Bylaws.
- "**Bylaws**" means the Bylaws of the Association, as amended from time to time, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit B.
- "**Common Elements**" means all portions of the Property that are owned or will be owned or leased by the Association and all appurtenance thereto, other than the Lots.
- "**Common Expenses**" means the expenditures made by or financial liabilities of the Association and any allocations to reserves.
- "**Common Expense Liability**" means the liability for Common Expenses allocated to each Lot pursuant to [§ 2-107 of the Act][act].
- "**Declarant**" means The Snyder Shelburne Properties, LLC, and its successors and assigns.
- "**Declaration**" means this Declaration of Planned Community for Kwiniaska Ridge as it may be amended from time to time, and includes all of the Exhibits hereto.
- "**Development Rights**" means any right or combination of rights reserved by the Declarant in this Declaration to create Lots, Common Elements, or Limited Common Elements within the Planned Community, to subdivide Lots or convert Lots into Common Elements, or to add or withdraw real estate from the Planned Community.  The Declarant's Development Rights include the Special Declaration Rights defined in the Act.
- "**Dwelling**" shall mean the single-family residential structure, carriage home or attached townhome structure, including garage, which is located on a Lot.
- "**First Mortgagee**" means the holder of any first mortgage lien or the beneficiary under any first deed of trust encumbering a Lot.  The term "mortgage" includes both mortgages and deeds of trust.
- "**Institutional**," as used in conjunction with "Lender," "Holder," "Mortgagee," or "First Mortgagee," means commercial and savings banks, savings and loan associations, trust companies and established mortgage companies, insurance companies, private mortgage insurance companies, pension funds, any corporation, including a corporation of or affiliated with the State of Vermont or United States Government, including, without limitation, the Vermont Economic Development Authority and its affiliates, or any federal credit unions, and other entities or agences chartered under federal or state laws.
- "**Limited Common Elements**" means a portion of the COmmon Elements allocated for the exclusive use of one or more, but less than all, of the Lots.
- "**Lot**" means a Unit as defined in the Act, being a portion of the Property, other than the Common Elements, intended for individual ownership and use as permitted in this Declaration and as numbered and depicted as the Single Family Lots (Lots S1–S27), Carriage Home Lots (Lots 1C–28C) and Townhome Lots (Lots T1–T36) as numbered and depicted on the Plat.  Each Lot shall contain one dwelling only.  The ownership of each Lot shall include, and there shall pass with each Lot as an appurtenance thereto, membership in the Association.  Each Lot shall for all purposes constitute real property which may be owned in fee simple and which may be conveyed, transferred, or encumbered in the same manner as any other real property.
- "**Open Space Parcels**" means the eight (8) open space parcels designated on the Plat and on the Plans as:
  - Open Space Parcel 1, 4.09 Acres;
  - Open Space Parcel 2, 0.31 Acres;
  - Open Space Parcel 3, 17.92 Acres;
  - Open Space Parcel 4, 0.53 Acres;
  - Open Space Parcel 5, 5.38 Acres;
  - Open Space Parcel 6, 0.80 Acres;
  - Open Space Parcel 7, 3.06 Acres;
  - Open Space Parcel 8, 0.75 Acres.
- "**Owner**" means the Declarant or any other person who owns a Lot, but does not include a person having an interest in a Lot solely as security for an obligation.  The Declarant is the owner of all Lots created by this Declaration until sold or conveyed to a third party.
- "**Planned Community**" means Kwiniaska Ridge, a Common Interest Community in which portions of the real estate are designated for separate ownership by the Owners and the remainder of the real estate is designated for ownership by the Association.
- "**Plans**" means the Plat and the following plans:  "Fairway at Spear, Spear Street [now known as Kwiniaska Ridge], Shelburne, Vermont, Overall Site Plan," prepared by Lamoureux & Dickinson Consulting Engineers, Inc. dated June 1, 2017, last revised February 11, 2019 on file with the Town of Shelburne Zoning and Planning Office, along with seventeen (17) accompanying detail sheets, and the plan entitled: "Kwiniaska Ridge, Spear Street, SHelburne, Vermont, Collamer Court to Street 'A,' Cross-Country Sewer Plan," prepared by Lamoureux & Dickinson Consulting Engineers, Inc. dated July 5, 2018, last revised June 27, 2019, and recorded in Map Slide 900A of the Town of Shelburne Land Records.
- "**Property**" means the real property, together with all appurtenant easements and any improvements located thereon, which is declared and subjected to this Declaration by incorporation in the description set forth in Exhibit A, as amended from time to time.
- "**Rules and Regulations**" means the provisions and limitations promulgated from time to time by the Board of Directors governing the use of the Common Elements and Lots.  A Rule is any policy, guideline, restriction, procedure, or regulation which is not set forth in the Declaration or Bylaws which governs conduct or the appearance of the Property.
- "**Unit**" means a Unit as defined in the Act, being a portion of the Property, other than the Common Elements, intended for individual residential ownership and use as permitted in this Declaration.  As used in this Declaration, each Lot shall be defined as a Unit and shall be deemed to be created and declared as of the date of this Declaration.
## Article 2 - Planned Community Property
### Section 2.1 - Property
The Property consists of all and the same lands and premises, together with improvements thereon, and all easements and rights appurtenant thereto, as described in Exhibit A and as depicted on the Plat and Plans.
### Section 2.2 - Description of Planned Community
As of the date hereof, the Declarant intends to develop the Property as a Planned Community consisting of ninety-one (91) Lots, of which Lots S1–S27 are Single Family Lots, Lots 1C–28C are Carriage Home Lots and are designed for use and occupancy by a carriage home on each building footprint lot, Lots T1–T36 are Townhome Lots and are designed for use and occupancy by an attached townhome on each building footprint lot, and eight (8) Open Space Parcels substantially as depicted on the Plat and Plans.
### Section 2.3 - Lot Boundaries
The perimeter boundaries of the Lots shall be the lot lines depicted on the Plat.  The lower and upper boundary of each Lot shall be determined by common law principles for the fee simple ownership of real property.  If any pipe, wire, conduit, culvert, or any other fixture lies partially within and partially outside the designated boundaries of a Lot, any portion serving only that Lot is a Limited Common Element allocated solely to that Lot, and any portion of it serving more than one Lot or any portion of the Common Elements is a part of the Common Elements.
## Article 3 - Common Elements
### Section 3.1 - Limited Common Elements
- A "Limited Common Element" is a portion of the Common Element allocated for the exclusive use of one or more than one, but fewer than all, of the Lots.
- All fixtures, improvements or driveways designated to serve, attached to, or adjacent to a Lot, but located outside the Lot's boundaries, are Limited Common Elements allocated exclusively to that Lot to which they are appurtenant.  
- The Limited Common Elements for the Lots include any improvements located outside of the footprint lot shown on the Plat which serve only one Lot including, without limitation, driveways, walkways, patios, decks, yard areas, landscape beds, pipes, lines, ducts, conduits, or other apparatus (including all gas, electricity, telephone, cable television, water, sewer, foundation walls, foundation drainage, or air conditioning pipes, lines, ducts, conduits, or other apparatus) serving only one Lot.
### Section 3.2 - Common Elements
- The "Common Elements" include the Limited Common Elements and consist of all the Property and the improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto described on Exhibit A and depicted on the Plat except the Lots.
- Except as otherwise set forth herein as to the use of the Limited Common Elements, the Common Elements shall remain undivided and shall be devoted to the common use and enjoyment of all Owners.  No owner or any other person shall maintain any action for partition or division thereof, unless the Property has been removed from the provisions of this Declaration pursuant to the Act.
- Each Owner shall have a right to use the Common Elements in accordance with the purpose for which they were intended without hindering or encroaching upon the lawful rights of other Owners.  Use of the Common Elements shall be subject to the limitations set forth herein for use of the Limited Common Elements and to the Rules and Regulations regarding use thereof as shall be established from time to time by the Board.
- The Common Elements include, without limitation:
  - The following roadways/driveways:  Caspian Lane, Elmore Street, Willoughby Lane and Carmi Drive until accepted by the Town of Shelburne as public roads.
  - The Open Space Parcels depicted on the Plat and Plans.
  - All easements, restrictions, and other encumbrances included with the Property as described in Exhibit A or depicted on the Plat and the Plans, including, without limitation, easements shown on the Plat and Plans for footing drains and stormwater pipes and the benefit of a sewer easement described in an Easement Deed from Elna N Samuelsen to The Snyder Shelburne Properties, LLC dated November 1, 2019 and recorded in Volume 455 at Page 344 of the Town of Shelburne Land Records, as amended by Corrective Easement Deed dated December 30, 2019 and recorded in Volume 456 at Page 3243 of the Town of Shelburne Land Records, until accepted by the Town of Shelburne and reference is made to the Easement Deed from Declarant to the Town of Shelburne dated December 27, 2019 and to be recorded in the Town of Shelburne Land Records to reconvey such sewer easement to the Town of Shelburne as a public sewer line.
  - Utility lines, equipment and other improvements serving the Property or serving more than one Lot, including, without limitation, footing drains and utility easements depicted as "20' Wide Utility Easement to the Homeowners Association," "15' Wide Utility Easement to Homeowners Association" and "Typical Utility Easement to the Homeowners Association" on the Plat.
  - All improvements located within or serving Property shown on the Plans, including pedestrian paths, water lines, sewer lines, sewer pumps, the stormwater drainage system located on the Property, including drains, catch basins, closed lines and stormwater ponds, open lands, fences, trees, shrubs, landscaping, and other site improvements located on the Property, including the pedestrian path depicted on the Plat until accepted by the Town of Shelburne as a public path.
### Section 3.3 - Allocated Interests
Each lot will be assigned one (1) of the ninety-one (91) memberships in the Association, meaning and intending to create an Allocated Interest of 1/91 for each Lot.  Except as otherwise set forth herein for the redetermination of the Allocated Interests by Declarant upon the filing of an amendment to this Declaration to exercise Development Rights and/or Special Declarant Rights, the Allocated Interests shall be of a permanent character and may not be changed without the consent of all Owners.  A Lot's Allocated Interest shall be determinative of all matters under the Act, this Declaration and the Bylaws which are properly determined by reference to the Allocated Interest, including, but not limited to the weight of each Owner's vote for Association purposes and the allocation of Common Expenses.  In the event Declarant exercises its Development RIghts to add Lots to the Planned Community, the Allocated Interests shall be redetermined so that each Lot's Allocated Interest shall be a fraction, the numerator of which shall be one (1) and the denominator of which shall be the total number of Lots declared in the Planned Community.
## Article 4 - Occupancy and Use Restrictions
### Section 4.1 - Use of Lots
Lots shall be used for residential purposes only, and no trade or business of any kind may be carried on therin, except home occupations allowed by municipal bylaws, and leases for residential purposes with a term of not less than six (6) months, and as otherwise provided in the Declaration and Bylaws.
The occupancy of each Lot is subject to and benefited by all easements, restrictions and permits of record, as depicted on the Plans, and described in Exhibit A.
### Section 4.2 - Alteration of Lots
An Owner may make improvements or alterations upon a Lot provided such improvements do not impair the Common Elements, Limited Common Elements, or infrastructure or utilities within any portion of the Planned Community, and provided prior written approval has been obtained by the Declarant or Board as provided below in Section 14.5.  Other than the construction of Dwellings and related improvements on the Lots, no structural improvements may be made to the Common Elements, or any other portion of the Planned Community by any Owner without the prior written approval of the Board.  No Lots may be further subdivided by Owners other than Declarant; provided, however, that a boundary adjustment between two adjacent Lots where no new or additional Lots are created shall not be deemed to be a "subdivision" within the meaning of this provision.
The boundaries between adjoining Lots may be relocated only in accordance with the terms and requirements of [§ 2-122 of the Act][act].
### Section 4.3 - Declarant's Reservations
Declarant reserves the right to use or maintain any portion of the Property as sales offices, management offices, models, and for signs until such time as the Declarant has conveyed title to all of the Lots to third party Owners.  The Owners and the Association shall not interfere with Declarant's efforts to complete the improvements to the Property, including the construction of additional Dwellings or Lots, to market and sell Lots and Dwellings, or with Declarant's exercise of any Development RIghts reserved in Article 13.
### Section 4.4 - State and Municipal Laws
Each Owner shall comply with all applicable permits, codes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations, of the State of Vermont and Town of Shelburne affecting the use of the Lots and the Common Elements.
### Section 4.5 - Interference with Others
No Lot shall be used or maintained in a manner which shall interfere with the comfort or convenience of occupants of other Lots or contrary to the Bylaws or the Rules and Regulations.
## Article 5 - Easements
### Section 5.1 - Easement for Access
Each Owner is hereby granted an easement, in common with Declarant and every other Owner, in all Common Elements for ingress and egress, including the Access Roads, until accepted as municipal roadways, and all common driveways shown on the Plat, for utility service, and support, maintenance and repair of each Lot, subject to such reasonable Rules and Regulations of the Association.  Each Lot is hereby benefited by an easement in common with others for ingress and egress through and over all Common Elements by persons lawfully using or entitled to the same.  Such easements and rights are subject to the limitations upon the use of the Limited Common Elements as otherwise set forth herein.
### Section 5.2 - Easement for Completion; Utilities
Declarant, for itself, and its successors and assigns, reserves the right to grant and reserve easements and rights of way:
  - through, under, over and across the Common Elements and Lots owned by the Declarant for the installation, maintenance, repair, replacement, and inspection of lines and appurtenances for public or private sewer, water, drainage, gas, electricity, telephone, television, and other utility services to the Lots;
  - for the purpose of completing the construction of the Dwellings and other improvements on the Property;
  - for the purpose of erecting, maintaining, and removing signs advertising Lots for sale or lease within the Property; and
  - through, under, over and across the Common Elements and Lots for the maintenance, repair, replacement and inspection of the stormwater, water and sewer systems for the Property, which easements shall be for the benefit of the Association after the period of Declarant control described below in Section 9.5.
### Section 5.3 - Easement for Support
Each Lot and the Common Elements shall have an easement for lateral and subjacent support from every other Lot and the Common Elements.
### Section 5.4 - Additional Easements
The Board of Directors of the Association shall have the power (without submitting the same to the Owners for approval) to authorize the appropriate officers of the Association to execute any and all easements as it may deem desirable for the benefit of the Planned Community over, under, above, or through any of the Common Elements for such purposes and upon such terms as the Board, in its sole judgment, deems desirable; provided, however, that all such easements shall be subordinate to the liens and rights of all mortgages and deeds of trust recorded prior in time thereto unless the mortgagee or trustee shall join therein.
### Section 5.5 - Upkeep
Maintenance, repair and replacement of the Common Elements and of the Lots shall be as provided for in this Declaration, the Bylaws for the Association, and the Act.  Each Owner shall afford to the Association and the other Owners, and to their agents or employees, access across his or her Lot reasonably necessary for those purposes.  If damage is inflicted on the Common Elements or any Lot through which access is taken, the Owner responsible for the damage, or the Association if it is responsible, shall promptly repair such damage.
## Article 6 - Damage or Destruction
### Section 6.1 - Duty to Restore
Any portion of the Property for which insurance is required under [27A V.S.A. § 3-113][act], or for which insurance carried by the Association is in effect, whichever is more extensive, shall be repaired or replaced promptly by the Association unless:
- The Planned Community is terminated, in which case [§ 2-118 of the Act][act] shall apply;
- Repair or replacement would be illegal under any state or local statute or ordinance governing health or safety; or
- Eighty percent (80%) of the Owners vote not to rebuild.
### Section 6.2 - Cost
The cost of repair or replacement in excess of insurance proceeds shall be a Common Expense.
### Section 6.3 - Election Not to Rebuild
If the entire Planned Community is not repaired or replaced:
- The insurance proceeds attributable to the damaged Common Elements shall be used to restore the damaged area to a condition compatible with the remainder of the Planned Community; and
- Except to the extent that other persons will be distributees:
  - the insurance proceeds attributable to Limited Common Elements which are not rebuilt shall be distributed to the Owners of the Lots to which those Limited Common Elements were allocated, or to lienholders, as their interests may appear in proportion to the Common Expense Liability of all of the Lots; and
  - the remainder of the proceeds shall be distributed to all of the Owners or lienholders, as their interests may appear, in proportion to the Common Expense Liability of those Lots.
## Article 7 - Termination; Condemnation
### Section 7.1 - Requirements for Termination
The Planned Community may be terminated only by the recorded agreement of the Owners to which at least eighty percent (80%) of the votes in the Association are allocated and only in accordance with and subject to the provisions of [§ 2-118 and 2-124 of the Act][act].
### Section 7.2 - Condemnation
If all or a part of the Planned Community is taken by any power having the authority of eminent domain, all compensation and damages arising from such taking shall be payable in accordance with [§ 1-107 of the Act][act].
## Article 8 - Insurance
### Section 8.1 - Casualty Insurance
In order to ensure that sufficient reconstruction or repair funds, or both, will be available to the Association if and when needed, the Board shall obtain insurance for the Common Elements and the Limited Common Elements, together with separate insurance for the duplex Dwellings on the Townhome Lots on the Property, in such amounts as it shall determine, to provide not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the current replacement value (exclusive of foundations, land, excavations, and other items that are normally excluded from such insurance coverage) in the event of damage or destruction from the casualty against which such insurance is obtained.  Such insurance shall protect against fire and all other hazards or perils customarily covered and the proceeds of such insurance shall be used only for the repair, replacement and reconstruction of the Common Elements unless determined otherwise in accordance with Article 6.  The Board may elect such endorsements and deductible provisions as are, in its judgment, consistent with good business practice and the purpose for which the insurance is bought.  Any such policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled or substantially changed, except upon at least ten (10) days' written notice to the insured.  The insurance for the duplex Dwellings on the Townhome Lots shall be exterior building structure insurance (master insurance policy) with an "all in" endorsement that shall insure all portions of the duplex Dwellings located from the sheetrock of the Dwellings outward to the exterior of the building, including, without limitation, sheetrock, interior partitions, studs, plumbing, and electrical fixtures, roofing, siding, insulation, and all portions of the Dwellings not included in the "interior portions" described below in Section 8.6.  The cost of the separate insurance for the duplex Dwellings on the Townhome Lots shall be separately assessed against the thirty-six (36) Owners of the Townhome Lots.
### Section 8.2 - Liability Insurance
The Board of the Association shall also purchase broad form comprehensive liability coverage in such amounts and in such forms as prudent management practice suggests.  A policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled or substantially changed, except upon at least ten (10) days' written notice to the insured.
### Section 8.3 - Other Provisions
Insurance policies carried pursuant to this Section shall provide that:
- Each Owner is an insured person under the policy to the extent of liability, if any, arising out of his or her interest in the Common Elements or membership in the Association.
- The insurer waives its rights to subrogation under the policy against any Owner or member of his or her household.
- No act or Omission by any Owner, unless acting within the scope of his or her authority on behalf of the Association will void the policy or be a condition to recovery under the policy.
- If, at the time of a loss under the policy, there is other insurance in the name of an Owner covering the same risk covered by the policy, the Association's policy provides primary insurance.
### Section 8.4 - Fidelity Coverage
The Association may obtain fidelity coverage against dishonest acts on the part of the Board, managers, employees, and volunteers responsible for handling funds belonging to or administered by the Association in such amounts and in such forms as prudent association management practices suggest.  Any such policy shall provide that it cannot be canceled or substantially changed, except upon at least ten (10) days' written notice to the insured.
### Section 8.5 - Premiums
Premiums and expenses for all insurance and fidelity coverage purchased by the Association shall be Common Expenses, except that the separate insurance for the duplex Dwellings on the TOwnhome Lots shall be separately assessed solely against the thirty-six (36) Owners of the Townhome Lots.  Where insurance premiums are increased as a result of increased risk attributable to a particular Lot, the Owner of the Lot at issue shall be responsible for the increase, based upon the insurance carrier's appraisal of risk inherent to said Lot.  A levy made against a Lot for an increase in premiums may be enforced in the same manner as Common Expenses.
### Section 8.6 - Separate Insurance
The Owner of each Lot (other than Townhome Lots) shall be responsible for obtaining, at his or her own expense, separate casualty and liability insurance for his or her own Lot and the Dwelling constructed thereon.  The Owner of each duplex Dwelling on the Townhome Lots shall be responsible for obtaining, at his or her own expense, any additional insurance for interior portions of his or her own Dwelling not covered by the master insurance policy for the Townhome Lots.  No insurance purchased by the Association shall in any way prejudice the right of each Owner of a Lot to obtain insurance for his or her own Lot and the Dwelling thereon for his or her own benefit, nor shall the insurance purchased by the Owner prejudice the Association's rights and protection under policies purchased by the Association under this Declaration.  All such separate policies of insurance obtained by an Owner of a Lot shall contain a waiver of subrogation if available.
### Section 8.7 - Adjustment; Insurance Trustee
Any loss covered by the property policy shall be adjusted with the Association but the proceeds for that loss are payable to any insurance trustee designated in the policy for that purpose, or otherwise to the Association, in either case to be held in trust for the Association each Owner and such Owner's mortgagee, as their interests may appear.
## Article 9 - The Association
### Section 9.1 - Authority
The business affairs of the Planned Community shall be managed by the Association.  The Association shall be governed by the Bylaws, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit B, as they may be amended from time to time.  The Association shall adopt and may amend the Bylaws and the Association may adopt and amend Rules and Regulations.
### Section 9.2 - Membership
- Each Owner shall be assigned one appurtenant and indivisible membership in the Association which may not be assigned, hypothecated, pledged or transferred in any manner except as an indivisible appurtenance to the Lot.  Multiple or joint Owners of a single Lot shall be treated for all purposes as jointly owning and holding the one membership appurtenant to that particular Lot.
- A membership appurtenant to a Lot shall be initiated by either:
  - the recording of a deed in the Town of Shelburne Land Records conveying a Lot to a purchaser; or
  - the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Town of Shelburne for a Dwelling constructed on a Lot, whichever sooner occurs.
Once a membership is initiated, liability for COmmon Expenses shall automatically commence.  Membership in the Association shall be owned and held by each Owner, including the Declarant, with respect to unsold Lots.
- The number of memberships in the Association shall automatically increase if additional Lots are declared and subjected to this Declaration.  No membership rights or liability for COmmon Expenses shall be allocated or attributed to a Lot until the Lot is either sold by Declarant to a third party or has been issued a certificate of occupancy.
- Liability for Common Expenses shall be assessed among the Owners in accordance with their Allocated Interest, unless altered as hereinafter set forth in Section 9.6.
### Section 9.3 - Voting Rights
Initially, there shall be two classes of membership in the Association voting memberships and non-voting memberships.  A voting membership shall be any membership owned and held by Declarant.  A non-voting membership shall be any membership owned and held by any Owner other than Declarant.  All memberships in the Association shall automatically become voting memberships:
- sixty (60) days after the sale by Declarant of three-fourths (¾ths) of the proposed ninety-one (91) Lots in the Planned Community;
- two (2) years after the Declarant has ceased to offer Lots for sale in the ordinary course of business;
- two (2) years after the exercise of any Development Rights to add new Lots; or
- upon Declarant amending the Bylaws to make all memberships voting memberships, whichever is the first to occur.
Thereafter only one class of voting membership shall exist.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, non-voting memberships shall be entitled to vote on those matters, identified in the Act, upon which Owners may vote during the period of Declarant control.
When a membership is a voting membership, each Owner, or one of the Owners if record title in a Lot is held by more than one person, shall be entitled to vote in any meeting of the membership.
### Section 9.4 - Board of Directors
The initial Board of the Association shall be three (3) in number and shall be appointed by the Declarant acting in its sole discretion and shall serve at the pleasure of the Declarant, so long as the Declarant retains control of the Association.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the members of the Board shall be elected by Owners who are not the Declarant within sixty (60) days after twenty-five percent (25%) of the Lots are conveyed to Owners (other than the Declarant).  At least thirty-three and one third percent (33%) of the members of the Board shall be elected by Owners who are not the Declarant within sixty (60) days after fifty percent (50%) of the Lots are conveyed to Owners (other than the Declarant).  After the period of Declarant control (described below), each member of the Board shall be an Owner of a Lot.
### Section 9.5 - Declarant Control
The Declarant will convey to the Association marketable title to the Common Elements by standard Warranty Deed(s) and/or Easement Deed(s) for One Dollar ($1.00), and the Association will accept said title.  Said conveyances of title (and the transfer of control of the Association which may or may not be made at the same time) shall be made:
- sixty (60) days after the sale by Declarant of three-fourths (¾ths) of the proposed ninety-one (91) Lots in the Planned Community;
- two (2) years after the Declarant have ceased to offer Lots for sale in the ordinary course of business;
- two (2) years after the exercise of any Development Rights to add new Lots; or
- voluntary relinquishment in writing by the Declarant (subject to the reserved rights set forth in [Section 3-103(d) of the Act][act]), whichever is the first to occur.
As long as Declarant retains control of the Association, no person may record any declaration or amendment to this Declaration or similar instrument affecting any portion of the Planned Community without Declarant's written consent thereto, and any attempted recording without compliance herewith shall result in such or similar instrument being void and of no force and effect unless subsequently approved by recorded consent signed by the Declarant.
### Section 9.6 - Miscellaneous
In addition to any other powers and authority given the Association or the Board in the Bylaws or in this Declaration:
- Common Expenses of the Association shall be borne among the Owners of the Lots in accordance with their Allocated Interest, except that the Board may allocate expenses among the Lots on a different basis if the basis is reasonably related to the benefits of the services provided.  In addition, the allocation of expenses to Lots constructed and owned by Declarant, but not occupied, may be less than Assessments allocated to Lots which have been conveyed to persons other than Declarant.
- The Board may enter into a management agreement to operate the affairs of the Association until such time as all memberships in the Association become voting memberships.  Within two (2) years after all memberships become voting memberships, any management agreement, maintenance, operations, or employment agreement entered into by Declarant may be terminated by the Association without cause upon giving ninety (90) days' notice; provided, however, that any such agreement that is unconscionable or was not bona fide may be terminated on ninety (90) days' notice before the expiration of the two year period.  In the event of a conflict between the above provisions and any requirements imposed by Institutional Mortgagees, the requirements of the Institutional Mortgagees shall control.
- The Association shall maintain current copies of this Declaration, their Bylaws, and any Rules and Regulations concerning the Planned Community, as well as its own books, records and financial statements.  These will be available for inspection by Owners or First Mortgagees.
## Article 10 - Assessment and Collection of Common Expenses
### Section 10.1 - Definition of Common Expenses
Common Expenses shall include:
- Expenses of administration, maintenance, and repair or replacement of the Common Elements;
- Expenses declared to be Common Expenses by the Board or by [the Act][act];
- Expenses agreed upon as Common Expenses by the Association; and
- Such reserves as may be established by the Association, whether held in trust or by the Association, for repair, replacement or addition to the Common Elements or any other real or personal property acquired or held by the Association.
### Section 10.2 - Assessment and Apportionment of Common Expenses
Except as provided in Sections 9.6 and 10.3, all Common Expenses shall be assessed against all Lots in accordance with their Allocated Interest in the Common Expenses as set forth in this Declaration.  If the Common Expense Liability is modified due to a redetermination of the Allocated Interests, any Assessments for Common Expenses not yet due shall be recalculated in accordance with the modified Common Expense Liability.
### Section 10.3 - Common Expenses Attributable to Fewer than all Owners
The following expenses may be assessed against less than all of the Owners:
- Any Common Expense for services provided by the Association to an individual Owner at the request of the Owner shall be assessed against the Lot which benefits from such service.
- Any Insurance premium increase attributable to a particular Lot by virtue of activities or construction of the Lot shall be assessed against that Lot.
- Assessments to pay a judgment against the Association may be made only against the Lots in the Common Interest Community at the time the judgment was rendered, in proportion to their Common Expense Liabilities.
- Any Common Expense arising from the misconduct of an Owner.
- Fees, charges, late charges, fines and interest charged against an Owner pursuant to the Declaration, the Bylaws, the Rules and Regulations of the Association, and the Act are enforceable as Common Expense assessments.
- Any expense incurred by the Board and/or the Association on behalf of an Owner or as a result of an Owner's failure to perform any of the obligations under Section 11.2(c) hereof is a Common Expense.
- Any common expense benefiting fewer than all of the Lots or their Owners may be assessed exclusively against the Lots or Lot Owners benefited.
### Section 10.4 - Lien
The Association shall have a statutory lien on a Lot in accordance with and subject to the requirements of [§ 3-116 of the Act][act] for any Assessment imposed against an Owner.
### Section 10.5 - Budget Adoption and Ratification
The budget for the Association shall be adopted pursuant to the procedures set forth in Article 5 of the Bylaws.
### Section 10.6 - Certificate of Payment of Common Expense Assessments
The Association on written request shall furnish to an Owner a statement in recordable form setting forth the amount of unpaid assessments against the Lot and any other matters required by [§ 4-109 of the Act][act].  The statement shall be furnished within ten (10) days after receipt of the request and is binding on the Association, the Board of Directors and every Owner.
### Section 10.7 - Payment of Common Expenses
All Common Expenses assessed under Sections 10.2 and 10.3 shall be due and payable as determined by the Board of Directors.  Any past due payments shall accrue interest at the legal rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum.
## Article 11 - Maintenance
### Section 11.1 - Maintenance of Common Elements
The Association shall maintain and keep in good repair at all times the Common Elements, including, without limitation, the Open Space Parcels, the Access Roads (until accepted by the municipality), pedestrian paths (until accepted by the municipality), water lines, sewer lines, sewer pumps, the stormwater drainage system including stormwater ponds, lighting, landscaping, utility lines and facilities, and including the Limited Common Elements (other than those facilities and improvements located within a public right of way), except for such maintenance of the Limited Common Elements as the Board of Directors shall, from time to time, delegate to the Lot Owners appurtenant thereto.
The maintenance shall be performed in a professional manner customary to the respective trade.  In addition, the Association shall have the right, but not the obligation, to maintain property not owned by the Association where the Board has determined that such maintenance would benefit the Owners and the Association shall have the obligation to maintain such property not owned by the Association as required by any permit or approval of the Planned Community by any governmental agency.
### Section 11.2 - Maintenance of Lots
- Each Owner shall maintain, repair and replace, at his or her own expense, all portions of his or her Lot and the Dwelling thereon in good repair.  Such maintenance shall be consistent with this Declaration.  In addition, each Owner shall be responsible for paying the real estate taxes assessed against the Lot, for insuring the Lot and all improvements thereon, and for maintaining all private electricity, telephone, cable television, and water lines or systems, sewer systems, tanks, pumps, pipes, lines, ducts, conduits, or other apparatus which serve only the Lot.  However, the Board may, by rule, decide to maintain any portion of the Lots.
- In addition, each Owner of a Carriage Home Lot or Townhome Lot shall be responsible for maintaining, repairing and replacing any driveway, walkway, patio or deck located outside a Carriage Home Lot or Townhome Lot which serves only the Owner's Lot and all landscape plantings located within the Lot or surrounding decks or patios.  All other landscaping located within the Common Elements shall be maintained, repaired and replaced by the Association.  In addition, in the event a Unit Owner of a Carriage Home Lot or Townhome Lot obtains approval under Section 14.5 to install a fence around their rear yard area, the area within such fences shall be a Limited Common Element appurtenant to the respective Unit and the Unit Owner shall be responsible for maintaining the fence and the area within the fence, with the exception of the lawn that will be mowed by the Association's landscaping contractor as long as the Owner maintains a gate that is at least 52" wide to allow access for the mowers, it being the intention that the Owner will be responsible for all other items located within the fenced area, such as flower beds.
- In the event that an Owner should fail to perform any obligation required in subsection (a) and (b) hereof as may be determined by the Board, then the Board may provide for the performance of any such neglected obligation by whatever reasonable means it may determine in its sole discretion.  In case of emergency as determined by the Board, it may act immediately; and in all other cases the Board may act hereunder following thirty (30) days written notice to the Owner.  All expenses incurred by the Association as a result of taking action under this section shall be chargeable to the Owner as provided for under Sections 9.6 and 10.3 hereof.
  In addition, the Owner of each attached Dwelling on a Townhome Lot shall be responsible for paying a pro rata portion of the maintenance, repair and replacement costs for all shared party walls, roofs, siding or other shared construction elements that are shared with any other Dwellings that are attached to the Owner's Dwelling.  Each Townhome Lot Owner's pro rata share of such costs shall be a fraction, the numerator of which shall be one (1) and the denominator of which shall be the number of attached Dwellings forming a single building.  For example, if a Townhome Lot Owner's Dwelling is part of an attached structure containing a total of two (2) attached Dwellings, the Townhome Lot Owner shall be responsible for one-half (½) of the costs to maintain any shared party walls, roofs, siding or other shared construction elements to the extent not covered by the Association maintenance described above.
## Article 12 - Compliance and Default
### Section 12.1 - Compliance
Each Owner shall be governed by and with, all of the provisions of this Declaration, the Bylaws, any Rules and Regulations established by the Board of Directors of the Association, as the same may be amended from time, and the Act.  In addition to the remedies provided by the Act, the Declaration, or the Bylaws, the failure of an Owner to comply with any of said requirements shall entitle the Association acting through its Board of Directors or through its agent or an aggrieved Owner, ot the following relief after appropriate notice to the defaulting Owner:
#### Liability
An Owner shall be liable for the expenses of any maintenance, repair, or replacement rendered by the Owner's gross negligence or by that of any invitee or guest, even if the Association maintains insurance for such damage.  No Owner shall conduct any activity which may result in an increase in insurance rates occasioned by the use, misuse, occupancy, or abandonment of a Lot or its appurtenances, or of the Common Elements.
#### Fines/Suspension
The Board of Directors of the Association shall have the right to impose upon a defaulting Owner a reasonable fine, commensurate with the severity of the violation of any of the provisions of the above-referenced documents, which fine shall become a continuing lien against the Lot of the defaulting Owner enforceable in the manner provided by the Act and the Bylaws.  In addition, the Association may suspend the right or privilege of a Unit Owner who fails to pay an Assessment, but in so doing the Association may not deny a Unit Owner the right to occupy their Unit, suspend the Unit Owner's right to vote, prevent the Unit Owner from seeking election to the Board, or withhold services to the Unit Owner if the effect would be to endanger the health, safety or property of any person.
#### Injunctions
The Board of the Association or any aggrieved Owner shall have the right or remedy by appropriate legal proceedings, either at law or in equity, to abate or enjoin the continuance of any violation of the provisions of the above-referenced documents, including, without limitation, an action to recover any sums due for money damages, injunctive relief, foreclosure of the lien for payment of all assessments, any combination thereof, and any other relief afforded by a court of competent jurisdiction.  Such remedies shall be deemed cumulative and shall not constitute an election of remedies.  The failure of the Association or its Board to enforce any rights, covenants, or conditions of the Planned Community shall not constitute a waiver of the right to enforce such rights, covenants, or conditions in the future.  There shall be and there hereby is created and declared to be, a conclusive presumption that any violation or breach, or any attempted violation or breach, of any of the covenants and restrictions of the Declaration or Bylaws shall so damage the Planned Community and its property values that it cannot be adequately remedied by action at law or exclusively by recovery of damages.
#### Costs and Attorneys' fences
In any proceeding of an alleged failure of an Owner to comply with the terms of this Declaration, the Bylaws or the Rules and Regulations of the Association, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover the costs of the proceeding and reasonable attorneys' fees.
### Section 12.2 - Rights of Owners
Each Owner shall have a right of action against the Association for failure of the Association to comply with the provisions of this Declaration, the Bylaws, the Rules and Regulations of the Association, or the decisions made by the Association; provided, however, that the Association shall have the right to use its discretion regarding an enforcement action pursuant to the provisions of [Section 3-102(g) of the Act][act].
### Section 12.3 - Waiver
No provision of this Declaration shall be deemed to have been waived by reason of any failure to enforce regardless of the occurrence of violations or breaches from time to time.
## Article 13 - Declarant's Reserved Development Rights
### Section 13.1 - Easement for Completion
For as long as the Declarant owns any interest in the Property including reserved development rights, the Declarant hereby reserves for itself and its successors and assigns, easements, rights of way, and licenses, and the right to grant easements, rights of ways and licenses to others, over, under, across and through all of the Property (other than Lots which have been sold by Declarant to Owners) for the purpose of:
- completing the improvements to the Property described in this Declaration, including Dwellings, roads, driveways, sewer, water and other utility lines, stormwater drainage systems, sidewalks, fences, trees, shrubs, landscaping, equipment and improvements, and for the purpose of sales activities, such as erecting signs advertising the Planned Community or the sale of Lots within the Planned Community;
- providing utility service to the Property;
- compliance with permits, laws, rules, regulations, ordinances and other governmental requirements; or
- exercising development rights reserved herein.
### Section 13.2 - Alteration of Lots
Declarant reserves the right to alter the layout and arrangement of the Lots, said right to last as long as the Declarant controls the Association or owns any of the Lots so altered.  If Declarant shall make any such alterations, they shall be reflected in an amendment to this Declaration.  The Declarant may make any structural alterations within or affecting any Lot, so long as Declarant owns said Lot, without the prior written consent of the Board.
### Section 13.3 - Amendment to Modify or Enlarge Planned Community
For so long as the Declarant owns any interest in the Property including reserved development rights, the Declarant reserves for itself and its successors and assigns, the absolute right, which may be exercised at any time or from time to time in the Declarant's sole discretion, to develop and improve all of the Property.  The location and configuration of the Lots proposed for the Property on the Plat and Plans may be modified by the Declarant in its sole discretion.  Declarant also reserves the right, in its sole discretion, at any time or from time to time to amend this Declaration to complete the Planned Community or to subject additional property to this Declaration.  Declarant's reserved development rights shall be exercised within fifteen (15) years after the transfer of Declarant control as described above in Section 9.5.
### Section 13.4 - Easement for Further Development
For so long as the Declarant owns any interest in the Property including reserved development rights, the Declarant hereby reserves for itself and its successors and assigns, without restriction or limitation, perpetual non-exclusive easements, rights of way, and licenses, and the right to grant easements, rights of way and licenses, over, under, across and through all of the Property (other than Lots which have been sold by Declarant to Owners) for the purpose of storing building materials and supplies and equipment used in improving the Property; construction, maintenance, repair, replacement of Dwellings, roads, driveways, pedestrian paths, fences, trees, shrubs, landscaping, utility lines, equipment and other improvements included as part or necessary to serve the portion of the Property being developed by the Declarant and any Dwellings located thereon; making future connections, hookups, and tie-ins to utility lines, equipment, and other improvements constructed to serve the Property, the Dwellings, or other improvements located thereon.  The easements, rights of way and licenses reserved hereunder shall be sufficient tin scope to permit development, use and occupancy on the Property of as many Dwellings and Lots as the Declarant in its sole discretion shall determine; provided, however, that the Declarant will not build more than one hundred nine (109) Dwellings and/or Lots on the Property.
### Section 13.5 - Permits and Approvals for Further Development
Each Owner acknowledges, by acceptance of a Warranty Deed, that the Declarant has the present right to develop ninety-one (91) Lots containing one (1) Dwelling each and additional amenities within the Open Space Parcels.  Neither the Association nor any Owner may take any action or adopt any rule that will interfere with or diminish any Development Rights or Special Declarant Rights without the prior written consent of the Declarant, not shall the Association or any Owner oppose, either directly or indirectly, such development and shall cooperate or cause the Association to cooperate with such development by executing permit applications if necessary.
### Section 13.6 - Amendments Under this Article
Any amendment to this Declaration permitted by this Article need be signed and acknowledged only by the Declarant, and it shall be deemed that the Association, owners, lienholders or mortgage holders have voted for such amendment or amendments.  In addition, prior to the sale of any Lots, the Declarant may make whatever amendment Declarant deems advisable, in Declarant's sole discretion, without the consent of any person.
### Section 13.7 - Transfer of Declarant's Development Rights
Declarant's reserved Development Rights may be transferred in accordance with [§ 3-104 of the Act][act].  No amendment to this Declaration may be made to diminish or alter the Declarant's reserved Development Rights and/or Special Declarant Rights without the written consent of Declarant.
### Section 13.8 - Reserved Rights Relating to Open Space Parcel 3
For so long as the Declarant owns any interest in the Property, the Declarant hereby reserves for itself and its successors and assigns, without restriction or limitation, the right to convey "Open Space Parcel 3, 17.92 AC" as more fully described and shown on the Plat to either the Association, a non-profit land trust or to the Town of Shelburne subject to the terms and conditions of the Open Space Agreement between the Declarant and the Town of Shelburne.
## Article 14 - Covenants and Environmental Restrictions
### Section 14.1 - Use of Property Subject to Permits
The Property may be used and conveyed only in accordance with the conditions of the Vermont Land Use Permit and the Town of Shelburne final plat approval for the development of the Property, and the permits and approvals reference therein; all protective covenants and easements and rights of way for utilities of record; and as all of the foregoing may be amended from time to time and as set forth on Exhibit A.
### Section 14.2 - Promulgation of Rules and Regulations
The Board of Directors may, from time to time, promulgate, modify, or delete use restrictions and Rules and Regulations applicable to the Lots and the Common Elements pursuant to the requirements of Section 5.6 of the Bylaws.  The Association, acting through the Board, shall have standing and the power to enforce such standards.
### Section 14.3 - Use
Only one residential Dwelling, and improvements appurtenant thereto, shall be erected or maintained on each Lot.
### Section 14.4 - Animals
No animals shall be permitted on the Property other than dogs and other domestic pets.  All dogs and other domestic pets shall be in the control of the Owner at all times while on the Property.  Owners are responsible for immediate cleanup of any waste in the public thoroughfares and/or damage to Common Elements.  Owners are also responsible for all impoundment costs incurred in the control of dogs or other domestic animals while in the Common Elements.  In addition, Owners are subject to the animal control ordinances of the Town of Shelburne.
### Section 14.5 - Architectural Control
Pursuant to [Sections 2-105(a)(15), 3-103 and 3-106 of the Act][act], except for Dwellings or improvements constructed or installed by the Declarant, no building, fence, wall or other structure shall be commended, erected, maintained or placed on a Lot, nor shall any addition or external alteration be made, until the design and location or alterations have been approved in writing by the Declarant or, upon transfer of Declarant's control of the Association, by the Board.  No approval shall be required for the design and location of any Dwelling or improvement constructed by the Declarant on the Property.  Any Owner seeking approval under this Section shall include a narrative description and site plan or drawing depicting the proposed improvement or improvements.  The declarant or Board, as the case may be, shall approve or deny a written request for approval within thirty (30) days after receipt and, in the event the Declarant or Board fail to issue a decision within said thirty (30) day period, the written request for approval shall be deemed to be approved.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, this section shall not preclude the installation solar collectors on the roof of a Dwelling provided that:
- such roof has an orientation to the south or within 45 east or west of due south; and
- the solar collectors are flush with the roof shingles.
### Section 14.6 - Signs
No signs, signboards, or advertising structures of any kind shall be erected or placed on a Lot at any time except for signs advertising the Lot for sale.
### Section 14.7 - Rubbish
There shall be no disposal of trash, rubbish or garbage or the burning of same on any Lot.
### Section 14.8 - Grading and Drainage
The grading and/or drainage patterns of any Lot in the Planned Community shall not be altered for any reason due to each Lot's necessary conformance with the plans submitted and approved by the Town of Shelburne and the District #4 ENvironmental Commission.
### Section 14.9 - Satellite Dishes
No antennas shall be installed on a Lot or on the exterior of any Dwelling erected thereon.  One dish type receiver, no greater than 18" in diameter or length, may be installed on the side or rear exterior wall of any Dwelling or in the rear or side yard of the Lot except where a side yard has frontage on a public street.
### Section 14.10 - Vehicles and Garage Use
Garages are restricted to use by the Lots for which they belong as a parking space for vehicles.  Garages may not be converted to living space.  No unregistered motor vehicle, or any boat, boat trailer, snowmobile, snowmobile trailer, camper, truck (other than pick-up trucks), or recreational vehicle may be parked, stored, or maintained on any portion of the Property.  THe parking of motor vehicles in other spaces which have not been designated for parking shall be strictly prohibited.
### Section 14.11 - Trees
Except for trees removed by Declarant, no tree six (6") inches or larger on the stump shall be cut on the Property until approved in writing by the Declarant or, after Declarant transfers control to the Association, by the Board of Directors.  In addition, no trees shall be cut on the Open Space Parcels, unless such trees are dead or dying and are a safety concern.
### Section 14.12 - Lighting
Except for seasonal decorative lights, all exterior lights must be installed and used in a manner which will not unduly disturb surrounding Lot Owners, do not violate any permit conditions and must be pre-approved by the Board of Directors.
### Section 14.13 - On-Site Fuel Storage
No on-site storage of gasoline, heating, or other fuels shall be permitted on any part of the Property, except for propane, and not more than ten (10) gallons of their fuel stored on each Lot for emergency purposes and operation of generators, snow blowers, lawn mowers and similar tools or equipment.
### Section 14.14 - Outbuildings
No structures of a temporary character, tents, shacks, barns, trailers, garages, unfinished basements, or other outbuildings shall be occupied as living quarters on the Property.
### Section 14.15 - Occupants Bound
All provisions of the Declaration and any rules and regulations or use restrictions promulgated pursuant thereto which govern the conduct of Lot Owners and which provide for sanctions against Lot Owners shall also apply to all occupants of the Property.
### Section 14.16 - Leasing
Lots may be leased for residential purposes.  All leases shall have a minimum term of six (6) months.  All leases shall require, without limitation, that the tenant acknowledge receipt of a copy of the Declaration, Bylaws, use restrictions, and Rules and Regulations of the Association.
The lease shall also obligate the tenant to comply with the foregoing and shall provided that in the event of noncompliance, the Board, in addition to any other remedies available to it, may, in the event the Low Owner shall fail to initiate and reasonable maintain an action to evict the tenant after written request to do so by the Association evict the tenant on behalf of the Lot Owner and specifically assess all costs associated therewith against the Lot Owner and the Lot Owner's property.
### Section 14.17 - Energy Conservation Measures
- Without the prior written consent of the Vermont District #4 Environmental Commission, or its successor, no alteration may be made to any Dwelling which would reduce the effect of water-conserving plumbing fixtures or insulation, including low-flush toilets, low-flow showerheads, and aerator or flow-restricted faucets.  All leases shall require maintenance of same and prohibit replacement with non-water conserving fixtures.
- All heated structures shall be constructed to meet the Residential Building Energy Standards (RBES) in effect at the time of construction.  THe installation and/or use of electric resistance space heating is specifically prohibited.
### Section 14.18 - Landscaping
The Association shall continually maintain all Common Elements, facilities, and landscaping substantially as approved by the Town of Shelburne Development Review Board and the District #4 Environmental Commission.  All dead or diseased landscape plantings shall be replaced as soon as reasonably possible.
### Section 14.19 - Special Covenants
The following special covenants shall apply:
- The Declarant will construct the stormwater treatment system on the Property in accordance with the approved plans and permit conditions.  After construction, the stormwater treatment system and offset project shall be maintained, repaired and replaced by the Association and by accepting a Deed for a Lot, each Lot Owner shall consent to the Association's responsibility for such obligations.  After construction, the Declarant shall have no further obligations for the maintenance, repair or replacement of the stormwater systems, except for construction defects occurring prior to the delivery of the systems to the Association.
- Fertilizer use on lawns shall be limited and shall only be allowed after a soil test, with the fertilizer application tailored to address any nutrient deficiencies.
- Notice is hereby given that the Association will agree in the future to make the open space area available irrevocably and in perpetuity for agricultural purposes with access to such open space over the roadways depicted on the Plat.  These agricultural uses may include, without limitation, plowing, planting, fertilizing and the use of the agricultural chemical, pesticides and herbicides in the course of cultivating, harvesting, storing and transporting agricultural feed or product.  Consistent with this notice, all Lots are conveyed subject to a perpetual easement for any noise, odors, dust and/or byproducts and impacts that may occur in the course of conducting accepted agricultural and best-management practices on the nearby lands, including Open Space Parcels for any noise, odors, dust, mud or slowing of traffic on the project roadways by agricultural vehicles.  All Lot Owners, by the acceptance of their deed, waive any objection to impacts arising from accepted agricultural and best-management practices which are consistent with the rules established pursuant to 6 V.S.A., Ch. 215 and are further notified that agricultural activities which are consistent with accepted agricultural and best-management practices do not constitute a nuisance.
- "Open Space Parcel 3, 17.92 AC" as more fully described and shown on the Plat will be remain open space in perpetuity and shall be owned and maintained by the Association as described above in Sections 3.2(d) and 11.1, unless otherwise conveyed to a non-profit land trust or the Town of Shelburne as set forth in Section 13.8 of this Declaration, and subject to the terms and conditions of the Open Space Agreement between the Declarant and the Town of Shelburne.
### Section 14.20 - Amendments
No amendment of Section 14.11, 14.17, 14.18 or 14.19 of this Article shall be effective without the prior written consent of the Vermont District #4 Environmental Commission and the TOwn of Shelburne Development Review Board.
## Article 15 - Amendments
### Section 15.1 - General
Except for the amendments which may be made by the Declarant hereunder and in [§ 2-109(f) or § 2-110 of the Act][act], amendments by the Association under [§§ 2-106(d), 2-108(c), or 2-112(a) of the Act][act], or by the Owners under [§§ 2-108(b), 2-112(a) or 2-118(b) of the Act][act], and except for the limitations set forth in [§ 2-117(d) of the Act][act], and except for specific amendments requiring a specified percentage of votes, this Declaration may be amended by vote or agreement of Lot Owners of Lots to which at least sixty-seven percent (67%) of the votes in the Association is allocated.  All amendments to this Declaration shall be made in accordance with [§ 2-117 of the Act][act].  If a provision in this Declaration requires the approval of a third party as a condition of effectiveness, the amendment is not valid without that approval.
### Section 15.2 - Rights Reserved in Declarant
Notwithstanding the amendment provisions set forth above in Section 15.1, the Declarant may unilaterally amend this Declaration in accordance with the provisions of Article 13, and may also unilaterally amend this Declaration at any time to satisfy and meet any requirement of the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, the Environmental Courty, the Town of Shelburne, or a title insurance company insuring or offering to insure all or a portion of the property.
### Section 15.3 - Special Declarant Rights
The Provisions in this Declaration creating Development Rights and Special Declarant Rights may not be amended without the consent of the Declarant.
### Section 15.4 - COnsent of Mortgage Holders
Amendments are subject to the consent requirements of Article 16.
## Article 16 - Rights Related to Mortgages
### Section 16.1 - Notice of Action
Upon written request to the Association from any Institutional Mortgagee, identifying its name and address and the Lot number or address, such Institutional Mortgagee shall be entitled to timely written notice of:
- any condemnation loss or any casualty loss which affects any material portion of the Planned Community or any Lot on which there is a first mortgage held, insured or guaranteed by such qualified requesting party;
- any delinquency in the payment of Assessments or other charges by an Owner subject to a first mortgage held or insured by such party, which delinquency remains uncured for a period of sixty (60) days;
- any lapse, cancellation or material modification of any insurance policy or fidelity bond maintained by the Association; or
- any proposed action which would require the consent of a specified percentage of Institutional Mortgagees.
### Section 16.2 - Special Voting Rights of Institutional Mortgagees
Any action with respect to the Planned Community including, but not limited to, material amendment to this Declaration, restoration or repair after partial or total condemnation or casualty loss, or termination of the legal status of the Planned Community under the Declaration, requiring the votes of the Owners shall also require the consent of Institutional Mortgagees holding mortgages on Lots which represent at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the mortgages of Institutional Mortgagees in the Planned Community; provided, however, that in the case of a termination of the Planned Community not made as a result of destruction, damage or condemnation, the applicable percentage shall be sixty-seven percent (67%) instead of fifty-one percent (51%).  For purposes of this Section, a "material amendment" includes, but is not limited to, any provision affecting:
- Assessments, assessment liens, or subordination of assessment liens;
- Voting rights;
- Reserves for maintenance, repair and replacement of Common Elements;
- Responsibility for maintenance and repairs;
- Reallocation of interests in the Common Elements or Limited Common Elements (other than reallocation in connection with the exercise of Declarant's Development RIghts) except that when Limited Common Elements are reallocated by agreement between Owners, only those Owners and only the Institutional Mortgagees which hold mortgages on such Lots must approve such action;
- Rights to use Common Elements and Limited Common Elements;
- Boundaries of Lots except that when boundaries of only adjoining Lots are involved, then only those Owners and the Institutional Mortgagees holding mortgages on such Lot must approve such action;
- Convertibility of Lots into Common Elements or Common Elements into Lots;
- Expansion or contraction of the Planned Community, or the addition, annexation or withdrawal of property to or from the Planned Community, except as otherwise reserved by Declarant in Article 13 or other than as specified in the Declaration;
- Insurance or fidelity bonds;
- Leasing of Lots;
- Imposition of restrictions on an Owner's right to sell or transfer his or her Lot;
- Restoration or repair of the Planned Community after a hazard damage or partial condemnation in a manner other than that specified in the Declaration;
- Termination of the Planned Community after occurrence of substantial destruction or condemnation; and
- Any provisions that expressly benefit mortgage holders, insurers or grantors.
### Section 16.3 - Failure to Provide Negative Responses
For the purposes of Section 16.2 above, an Institutional Mortgagee who receives a written request to approve action in accordance with Section 16.2, delivered by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, shall be deemed to have consented to such action unless said Mortgagee provides a negative response to the Association within sixty (60) days of the date of receipt by the Mortgagee of the written request; provided, however, that the 60 day waiver rule shall not apply to an amendment that affects the priority of the lender's security or their ability to foreclose, and for such amendments, the lender's consent is required.
## Article 17 - Miscellaneous
### Section 17.1 - Invalidity
If any provision of this Declaration is held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect other provisions of this Declaration which can be given effect without the invalid provisions and to this end the provisions of this Declaration are severable.
### Section 17.2 - Headings
The headings in this Declaration are for purposes of reference only and shall not limit or otherwise affect the meaning thereof.
### Section 17.3 - Agent
The person who shall receive service of process for the Association during the period of Declarant control is Robert H. Rushford Esq., Gravel & Shea PC, 76 St Paul Street, Burlington, VT  05402-0369.
### Section 17.4 - Declarant's Disclaimer for Economic Benefit
Declarant has made no representations, and Declarant hereby disclaims any representations made by anyone claiming to act as Declarant's authorized agent, as to the feasibility of renting a Lot in the Planned Community or otherwise generating income or deriving any other economic benefit from a Lot.
### Section 17.5 - Declarant's Disclaimer for Security
Neither the Association nor the Declarant shall be held liable for any loss or damage by reason of failure to provide adequate security or ineffectiveness of security measures undertaken.  All Owners, tenants, guests, and invitees of any Owner, as applicable, acknowledge that the Declarant and the Association are not insurers and that each Owner, tenant, guest, and invitee assumes all risk of loss or damage to persons, to Dwellings, and to the contents of Dwellings, and further acknowledge that neither the Declarant nor the Association has made any representation or warranty, nor has any Owner, tenant, guest, or invitee relied upon any representation or warranty, express or implied, including any warranty of merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose relative to any security measures recommended or undertaken.
### Section 17.6 - Governing Law
This Declaration shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Vermont, without giving effect to such jurisdiction's principles of conflicts of laws.
### Section 17.7 - Conflicts
In the event of a conflict between the Declarant and the Bylaws, the Declaration shall control except to the extent the Declaration is inconsistent with the Act, in which event the Act shall control.